From mtk@id.cbs.dk Tue Mar  2 15:00:02 2004
Date: Tue, 2 Mar 2004 15:00:02 +0100
From: Matthias Trautner Kromann <mtk@id.cbs.dk>
To: nordic-treebank@ilf.uio.no
Subject: Program for the "Tools and resources" session
Message-ID: <20040302140002.GA3573@mtkromann.id.cbs.dk>
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=iso-8859-1
Content-Disposition: inline
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 8bit
User-Agent: Mutt/1.4i
Status: RO
Content-Length: 4190
Lines: 84

Dear NTN members,

I have enclosed the program for the presentations in the Tools and
Resources session of the Lovik meeting:

    09.00-09.30 Eckhard Bick: TIGERizing Arboretum - feeding VISL to
                the beast.
    09.30-10.00 Joakim Nivre: Converting MALT XML to TIGER XML.
    10.00-10.30 Matthias Trautner Kromann: Converting the Danish
                Dependency Treebank to TIGER XML.

    10.30-11.00 Coffee break.

    11.00-11.30 Martin Volk: The ANNOTATE tree editor. 
    11.30-12.30 GENERAL DISCUSSION: Beyond syntactic treebanks: How to
                create and encode treebanks that include discourse,
                dialogue, and spoken language phenomena. 

Each presentation is expected to take at most 30 minutes, including 20
minutes for presentation and 10 minutes for discussion. 

So far, most of the work within the NTN has focused on syntax
treebanks for written text. However, many NTN members plan to extend
their treebanks to the domains of discourse, dialogue, and spoken
language (we will refer to these jointly as "discourse phenomena").
The same trend can be observed internationally in many projects --
prominent examples include the on-going work on the Penn Discourse
Treebank (http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~pdtb), Daniel Marcu's RST treebank
for English (http://www.isi.edu/~marcu/discourse), and the
COCONUT/DAMSL projects for dialogue annotation
(http://www.pitt.edu/~pjordan/papers/coconut-manual.ps). 

Since there seems to be great interest in discourse phenomena within
the network, but few concrete proposals for how to proceed, we have 
reserved the remaining one hour in the "Tools and resources" session
for a general discussion with particular emphasis on how to create
and represent treebanks that combine syntactic annotations with
annotations for discourse, dialogue, and spoken language.
Participants in the Lovik meeting are therefore encouraged to think
about the following topics:

    * COMPETENCES WITHIN THE NETWORK AND POTENTIAL COLLABORATION: What
      competences do we have within the network for discourse
      phenomena, and how can we share these competences?  What plans
      exist within the network for creating treebanks for discourse
      phenomena? What is the potential for collaboration? 

    * SPOKEN LANGUAGE AND MULTIMODAL DATA: How do we best represent
      non-textual corpora, including corpora consisting of sound and
      video, along with transcriptions and different levels of
      annotation? Can we agree on a common representation format? 

    * COMMON TOOLS AND REPRESENTATION FORMATS: Are there any
      limitations in TIGER XML and TIGERSearch -- our agreed common
      representation format and search tool for syntactic treebanks --
      that make them unsuited for treebanks that deal with discourse
      phenomena? What are the problems and the possible solutions?
      Should we stick with TIGER XML as it is, try to fix it, or adopt
      an alternative common representation format for discourse
      treebanks in the longer term (say, based on XCES or ATLAS)? 

    * THEORIES AND ANNOTATION SCHEMES: What are the internationally
      leading theories for discourse phenomena that could be used to
      create discourse treebanks? How do we plan to use a discourse
      treebank, and what are the important phenomena to encode, given
      these purposes? What is the potential for collaboration? Can we
      develop a joint set of annotation guidelines, possibly based on
      the guidelines of a state-of-the-art discourse project?
      
We encourage all network members to think about these issues within
the context of their own projects, and to participate in the
discussion. Members of the network who have particular experience with
discourse, dialogue, or spoken language are particularly encouraged to
prepare small 5 or 10 minute opinions that can form a good starting
point for the discussion. 

Regards,
Matthias

-- 
Matthias Trautner Kromann    Dept of Computational Linguistics
Email: mtk@id.cbs.dk         Copenhagen Business School
Web: www.id.cbs.dk/~mtk      Bernhard Bangs Allé 17B
Phone: (+45) 3815 3166       DK-2000 Frederiksberg C, DENMARK

